Clarify allowed-values constraints (#413)
usnistgov/metaschema: website/content/specification/syntax/constraints.md

- `<expect>`

## `<define-assembly>` constraints

The following constraint types are allowed for `<define-assembly>` definitions.

- [`<allowed-values>`](#enumerated-values)
- `<matches>`
- `<index-has-key>`
- `<expect>`
- `<index>`
- `<is-unique>`
- `<has-cardinality>`

## Common Constraint Data

Each individual constraint allows the following data.

### `@id`

A constraint MAY have an OPTIONAL `@id` attribute, which provides an identifier for the constraint.

Metaschema processors MAY use the identifier for processing constraints and/or referencing them in output for later analysis.

### `@level`

A constraint MAY have an OPTIONAL `@level` attribute, which identifies the severity level of a violation of the constraint.

If defined, a `@level` MUST have a value of either: `INFORMATIONAL`, `WARNING`, `ERROR`, or `CRITICAL`.

Metaschema processors MAY perform conditional processing and/or presentation of constraint violations based on the level value.

### `@target`

The *target* of a constraint identifies the content nodes that a constraint applies to.

Not all constraint types require a `@target`. Each constraint type defines if the `@target` is required, optional, or implicit.

> When provided, the value of a `@target` MUST be a valid Metapath expression.

Author: I think this is a very valid concern and you are right, I am sure we will cover this in usnistgov/metaschema#311. I will comment with that to link to this comment so we consider it when to take on that work.

> Keeping this more limited in some very simple ways (such as 'downward-looking paths' or referring to XSLT match pattern syntax) would make implementation easier.

I am pretty sure as it stands now, the current conception of Metapath and allowed-constraints *primarily to support the OSCAL use case* matches this limited in simply ways design. @david-waltermire-nist, are we on the same page?

> When provided, the value of a `@target` MUST be a valid Metapath expression.

Author: OK, I talked with Dave after I wrote the above comment and there was some miscommunication on my part, @wendellpiez. I looked at [grammar embedded in metaschema-java](https://github.com/usnistgov/metaschema-java/blob/8635384207305463467e41a663c2255b46f77cdb/core/src/main/antlr4/Metapath10.g4) (at least until we pick up #410 and merge it), the different axes, except `sibling`, are already implemented in that grammar. I was mistaken. That said, I presume we are going to have align this in the #311 issue.

Are we ok for now referencing this thread in #311 and resolving this comment for now? I agree more detailed work should happen on the Metapath front but I do not intend to touch on those docs in this PR.

If a `@target` value is not defined, a Metaschema processor MUST process the value as `target="."`, the current context of that constraint definition in a module, for a [field](#define-field-constraints) or [flag](#define-flag-constraints).

> A *target* can apply to any node(s) in the document instance(s). There is no guarantee the constraint *target* is a child of its respective assembly, field, or flag. Thus, a Metaschema processor MUST resolve the Metapath expression to identify the actual target nodes that the constraint applies to. If no resulting target nodes are identified, then the constraint MUST be ignore.

Author: Doh, I missed this. Thanks, @wendellpiez.

## Common Constraint Data

Metaschema modules can define different kinds of constraints to support data validation, inter-documenting indices, and intra-document indices. Below are constraint data that modules may include within any of those different constraint types.

### `@id`

> A constraint MAY have an OPTIONAL `@id` attribute so Metaschema processors MAY identify use the identifier for processing constraints and/or referencing them in output for later analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A constraint MAY have an OPTIONAL `@id` attribute, which provides an identifier for the constraint. Metaschema processors MAY use the identifier for processing constraints and/or referencing them in output for later analysis.
```

### `@level`

> A constraint MAY have an OPTIONAL `@level` attribute so Metaschema processors MAY perform conditional processing and/or presentation of constraint violations based on the value of applicable constraints for a document. If defined, a `@level` MUST have a value of either `INFORMATIONAL`, `WARNING`, `ERROR`, or `CRITICAL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A constraint MAY have an OPTIONAL `@level` attribute, which identifies the severity level of a violation of the constraint. If defined, a `@level` MUST have a value of either: `INFORMATIONAL`, `WARNING`, `ERROR`, or `CRITICAL`. Metaschema processors MAY perform conditional processing and/or presentation of constraint violations based on the level value.
```

## Enumerated values

> One kind of Metaschema constraint is restricting assembly, field, or flag value(s) with `allowed-values` enumerations. Metaschema processors MUST process `allowed-values` enumerations as defined with the `allow-other` attribute.

Reviewer: An assembly has no value.

```suggestion
One kind of Metaschema constraint is restricting field, or flag value(s) with `allowed-values` enumerations. Metaschema processors MUST process `allowed-values` enumerations.

For an `allowed-values` enumeration, the following applies for the `allow-other` attribute:
```

1. When the `allow-other` attribute is defined as `allow-other="no"`, the processor MUST strictly validate content instances with enumerations: only defined `enum` values are valid for the given target(s).

> 2. When the `allow-other` attribute is defined as `allow-other="yes"`, the processor MUST loosely validate content instances with enumerations: both `enum` values and other values are valid.

Reviewer: Need to qualify "loosely" as it is not clear what this means. This could be a SHOULD or MAY.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. When the `allow-other` attribute is defined as `allow-other="yes"`, the processor MAY loosely validate content instances with enumerations. A validation warning MAY be raised for any value that does not match an enumerated value.
```

> 3. When the `allow-other` attribute is not explicitly defined, the Metaschema processor MUST strictly validate content instances. The implied default is `allow-other="no"`.

Reviewer: This could be defined with the first item.

When the `allow-other` attribute is defined as `allow-other="no"` or not explicitly defined, ...

Author: Changed in https://github.com/usnistgov/metaschema/pull/413/commits/68a1d8de51251f4c820cae877bb6f00fa1fa1f60.

> Within `allowed-values` of a `constraint`, a Metaschema processor MUST strictly or loosely validate `enum` values with the `@value` attribute. A Metaschema processor MAY use the text value of the `enum`'s XML element as documentation for a given allowed value enumeration. Below is an example.

Reviewer: This should be phrased to define what to do with the value. For example.

For an `allowed-values` enumeration to match, the content value MUST be an exact match with an enumerated value.

Reviewer: The first sentence should be made informational and should be moved before the actual requirements, since it doesn't state any new requirements.
```suggestion
Within `allowed-values` of a `constraint`, a Metaschema processor MUST strictly or loosely validate `enum` values with the `@value` attribute.

A Metaschema processor MAY use the text value of the `enum`'s XML element as documentation for a given allowed value enumeration. Below is an example.
```

The last sentence is fine here.

Author: Oh ok, thanks for this. I read too much into your original PR comment and was going to rewrite it with a different perspective, not that of the Metaschema processor. This helps keep me on the rails, appreciated!

## Enumerated values

> One kind of Metaschema constraint is restricting field, or flag value(s) with `allowed-values` enumerations. Metaschema processors MUST process `allowed-values` enumerations.

Reviewer: We need to discuss the targeting of constraints using `@target`, which can be done generically for all constraints. Some types of constraints have an implicit '.' context target, such as those directly on a flag, since a flag has no children.

> For an `allowed-values` enumeration, the following applies for the `allow-other` attribute:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Value restriction can be either strict or loose.

- strict: only defined `enum` values are valid for the given target(s)
- loose: both `enum` values and other values are valid

For an `allowed-values` enumeration, the following applies for the `allow-other` attribute:
```

> 1. When the `allow-other` attribute is defined as `allow-other="no"` or not explicitly defined, the processor MUST strictly validate content instances with enumerations: only defined `enum` values are valid for the given target(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. When the `allow-other` attribute is defined as `allow-other="no"` or not explicitly defined, the processor MUST strictly validate content instances with enumerations. A validation error MUST be raised for an value that does not match an enumerated value.
```

## Enumerated values

The `allowed-values` constraint is a kind of Metaschema constraint that restricts field or flag value(s) based on an enumerated set of permitted values.

Metaschema processors MUST process `allowed-values` enumerations.

> The `@target` attribute of an `<allowed-values>` constraint is used to determine the specific content values the constraint applies to. By evaluating the `@target`, it is possible to identify the *target set* of `<allowed-values>` constraints targeting a given value.

Author: Sorry, I made a separate comment and I had missed this point, I guess that makes more sense.

The *source* of each allowed `<allowed-values>` constraint in the *target set* is identified as one of the following sources:

- **model:** The constraint is defined *in* a Metaschema module.
- **external:** The constraint is defined *outside* a Metaschema module, e.g. external constraints.

The *target set* of `<allowed-values>` constraints is verified for correctness using the `@extension` attribute on each set member.

> Once the *target set* of `<allowed-values>` constraints is validated, the `@allow-other` attribute is used to determine the *expected value set* for a given content value.

Author: But isn't there only one `allow-other` attribute but per `allowed-values` constraint, not attributes plural?

> Once the *target set* of `<allowed-values>` constraints is validated, the `@allow-other` attribute is used to determine the *expected value set* for a given content value.

Reviewer 2: It is a set of constraints, which apply to a given node. There could be many such constraints, many `allow-other` constraints, and many values of `allow-other` given on those. This is why "respective".

It could be rephrased as "the `@allow-other` attribute (or defaulted value) for each applicable `allow-other` constraint" or some such.

The point is that the target is not the constraint, it is the node to which a constraint applies. Each constraint has multiple targets, and (now, under these rules), each node can have multiple targeting constraints, not only each one applicable, but applicable collectively.

- **`external`:** Multiple matching `<allowed-values>` constraints are allowed for the same target value, which can be sourced from within the model or externally through a set of external constraints.

    All allowed-values constraints, declared within the model and externally through an extension, that match the same @target can be combined. This is the most permissive option.

One of the following requirements MUST apply when processing a value's *target set* to validate it.

1. The *target set* MUST contain a single `<allowed-values>` constraint with the `@extension` attribute value `none`.
1. All `<allowed-values>` constraints in the *target set* MUST have the `@extension` attribute value `model` and originate from a *model* source.
1. All `<allowed-values>` constraints in the *target set* MUST have the `@extension` attribute value `external` and originate from either a *model* or *extension* source.

> 1. An error MUST be raised indicating the *target set* is invalid.

Reviewer: > Hm. Does processing stop? Does a constraints implementation have the option of reporting such a discrepancy and continuing? If so, is it free to 'do its best'?

@wendellpiez  I talked with @aj-stein-nist about this. We need to be more clear around if an error is fatal or recoverable. We also need to be more clear around what is expected around user interaction, e.g. the user is notified.

> How many of these errors can be detected and prevented (or reported) at metaschema compile ('composition') time, rather than only at document parse-time? (Apologies if I have no ready answer to that yet.)

IMHO, preventing these errors in a different part of the processing is out of scope here.

This is about constraint processing, not parsing. We can't assume anything about implementation approaches. Not all implementations will have a "compile" step. The Java implementation doesn't have one for example.

Our responsibility in this part of the specification is to be clear about what constitutes an error and how an error should be handled.

### `@allow-other`

The *expected value set* can be considered *open* or *closed*.

- **open:** In an open set, the actual value can be any value. The *expected value set* provides suggested values.
- **closed:** In a closed set, the actual value is expected to match a value in the *expected value set*.

For each `<allowed-values>` constraint, the `@allow-other` attribute MUST be one of the following values.

- **`yes`:** Identifies the *expected value set* as *open*, as long as no other `<allowed-values>` constraint in the *target set* has `@allow-other="no"` declared explicitly or implicitly.
- **`no`:** (default) Identifies the *expected value set* as *closed*. **This is the implicit default value if no `@allow-other` is provided.**

> One of the following requirements MUST apply when processing the a value's *target set* to determine the *expected value set*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the following requirements MUST apply when processing a value's *targeting set* of `<allowed-values>` constraints to determine the *expected value set*.
```

Author: I agree with the additions but should we not keep it target set so align with the name of the tag in the syntax itself?

> 1. One `<allowed-values>` constraint in the *target set* MUST have the `@allow-other` attribute value `no`. The *expected value set* is *closed*.

Reviewer 2: Effectively this means that any metaschema author can close a set of all allowed-values over a given value, by defining an `allowed-values` with `allow-other='no'`. This concerns me a little. For example, a metaschema has:

```
<allowed-values target=".//prop[@name='boo']" allow-other='yes'>... </allowed-values>
```

then an author introduces a new constraint:

```
<allowed-values target=".//part[@name='bah']//prop[@name='boo']" allow-other='no'>... </allowed-values>
```

isn't the effect that the new constraint turns the old one into 'closed' in some places and 'open' (as originally intended), in others?

Is this what is wanted? I am not sure the answer is not 'yes'. But it may be harder to explain and rationalize than a simpler 'gigo' rule that forces metaschema authors to be more careful (by running two checks instead of one and exposing rather than reconciling conflicts and contradictions).

This is not a blocker but maybe something that requires further discussion, documentation and field testing.

Reviewer: @wendellpiez Some comments below.

> Effectively this means that any metaschema author can close a set of all allowed-values over a given value, by defining an `allowed-values` with `allow-other='no'`. This concerns me a little. For example, a metaschema has:
> 
> ```
> <allowed-values target=".//prop[@name='boo']" allow-other='yes'>... </allowed-values>
> ```
> 
> then an author introduces a new constraint:
> 
> ```
> <allowed-values target=".//part[@name='bah']//prop[@name='boo']" allow-other='no'>... </allowed-values>
> ```
> 
> isn't the effect that the new constraint turns the old one into 'closed' in some places and 'open' (as originally intended), in others?

Yes, but only for props contained in a "bah" part. All other "boo" props are still open under this algorithm.

> Is this what is wanted? I am not sure the answer is not 'yes'.

Yes. It is desirable as a model author to have fine-grained control around when value sets are considered open or closed under specific conditions. It is not enough to just have purely open or closed value sets. The OSCAL use case has shown this.

>  But it may be harder to explain and rationalize than a simpler 'gigo' rule that forces metaschema authors to be more careful (by running two checks instead of one and exposing rather than reconciling conflicts and contradictions).

This is a matter of taste. The current deterministic solution allows the model author to rely on the convergence provided by the solution or to approach writing the content using multiple checks. This flexibility is desired. Either way, there are clear rules on how an implementation MUST behave.

> This is not a blocker but maybe something that requires further discussion, documentation and field testing.

We are providing a solution here that: 1) does not break OSCAL use, 2) is deterministic in all cases, and 3) can be tested through implementation. These are the 3 objectives we agreed to address.

To discuss alternatives we need to go beyond talking conceptually. Are you willing to write an alternative specification around this feature for discussion that addresses these 3 objectives?

Reviewer 2: IIUC my question is less the design of the feature but rather whether the added complexity is really needed, addressing a real use case (i.e., "seen in the field") that is not better addressed some other way. I have been assured there are such use cases in OSCAL. Maybe we should start there? Partly b/c those use cases also show nice testing for them that must implement. Where are some clashing or otherwise-clashing constraints I can look at, as instances of where we want this behavior?

Author: We just pushed a lot of updates to discuss the ordering and processing mechanics of constraints was not there before for review. I will close this for now, feel free to reopen if those updates are not clear (I suppose it will be discussed in the community meeting coming up).

>     The actual value MUST match one of the enumerated values declared on any of the `<allowed-values>` constraints in the *target set**target set*. An error MUST be produced to indicate that the value doesn't match one of the enumerated values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The actual value MUST match one of the enumerated values declared on any of the `<allowed-values>` constraints in the *targeting set*. An error MUST be produced to indicate that the value doesn't match one of the enumerated values.
```

> 2. All `<allowed-values>` constraints in the *target set* MUST have the `@allow-other` attribute value `yes`.  The *expected value set* is *open*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. All `<allowed-values>` constraints in the *targeting set* MUST have the `@allow-other` attribute value `yes`.  The *expected value set* is *open*.
```

>     Any type appropriate actual value MUST be allowed. A warning MAY be produced to indicate that the value doesn't match one of the enumerated values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Any type-appropriate actual value MUST be allowed. A warning MAY be produced to indicate that the value doesn't match one of the enumerated values.
```

## Enumerated values

The `allowed-values` constraint is a kind of Metaschema constraint that restricts field or flag value(s) based on an enumerated set of permitted values.

Metaschema processors MUST process `allowed-values` enumerations.

Value restriction can be either strict or loose.

> - strict: only defined `enum` values are valid for the given target(s)
> - loose: both `enum` values and other values are valid

Reviewer: Deleted with the above.

```suggestion
```

> ### `<allowed-values>`

Reviewer: With the above.
```suggestion
```

The `@target` attribute of an `<allowed-values>` constraint is used to determine the specific content values the constraint applies to. By evaluating the `@target`, it is possible to identify the *target set* of `<allowed-values>` constraints targeting a given value.

The *source* of each allowed `<allowed-values>` constraint in the *target set* is identified as one of the following sources:

- **model:** The constraint is defined *in* a Metaschema module.
- **external:** The constraint is defined *outside* a Metaschema module, e.g. external constraints.

The *target set* of `<allowed-values>` constraints is verified for correctness using the `@extension` attribute on each set member.

Once the *target set* of `<allowed-values>` constraints is validated, the `@allow-other` attribute is used to determine the *expected value set* for a given content value.

The following subsections detail the processing requirements for the `@extension` and `@allow-other` attributes.

> #### `@extension`

Reviewer: This can be flattened.

```suggestion
### `@extension`
```

- **`external`:** Multiple matching `<allowed-values>` constraints are allowed for the same target value, which can be sourced from within the model or externally through a set of external constraints.

    All allowed-values constraints, declared within the model and externally through an extension, that match the same @target can be combined. This is the most permissive option.

One of the following requirements MUST apply when processing a value's *target set* to validate it.

1. The *target set* MUST contain a single `<allowed-values>` constraint with the `@extension` attribute value `none`.
1. All `<allowed-values>` constraints in the *target set* MUST have the `@extension` attribute value `model` and originate from a *model* source.
1. All `<allowed-values>` constraints in the *target set* MUST have the `@extension` attribute value `external` and originate from either a *model* or *extension* source.
1. An error MUST be raised indicating the *target set* is invalid.

> #### `@allow-other`

Reviewer: This can be flattened.

```suggestion
### `@allow-other`
```
